So this is my suicide video.
I've been having a lot of problems as of late;
My book didn't sell well.
'This Is Why I Hate You'
So I'm gonna kill myself
Because nobody cares about what I have to say.
Let's do this.
Before I kill myself, I want to read you guys some parts of my book.
So you could know what you were missing by not buying it.
Chapter 15 : Death Is Your Wingman
'Beads of her sweat mixed with an occasional tear fell
on me as she slammed her body into me over and over.
I felt horrible for her,
I wanted to do everything I could for her to ease her pain
So I went along with her every demand without hesitation.
It's about sympathy sex.
Chapter 7 : Blood Means Nothing
'It was amazing how hard the back of his body hit the dashboard
the whole car shook as my leg launched from the backseat towards the dash
repeatedly connecting with his helpless oversized body.'
Like three people bought this book
Out of millions of subscribers, about three people.
So this is how it ends. [chuckles]
How fitting I die on camera.
Last time I'll be seeing daylight,
'Cause I'm gonna be dead!
Gotta get this other garage door too.
Now I can kill myself.
Auto-detects when I'm close 'cause it's fancy schmancy.
Not that it matters anymore.
Gotta roll down the window to make sure the gas fumes get in.
I should probably listen to my song 'Black Ink' available
on iTunes now so the proceeds can help pay for my funeral.
♫THE CHILDREN FOREVER SHATTERED IN THE DARKNESS♫
♫MY THOUGHTS LIKE BLACK INK IN THE WATER♫
That was fun, but now it's time to die
I guess the only thing I want to say before I go is,
Fuck you people.
Yeah, that's-
That's my last words, 'Fuck you people.'
So,
Put that on my tombstone.
As you can see the garage doors' closed
and Tesla's automatically turned on
So I guess I just have to wait.
Alright, so I'm gonna set up the camera over there
And you guys can just watch me slowly cease to exist.
Doesn't fit, story of my life.
Goodbye, assholes.
Dying is so boring!
I wanna die faster!
[inhales & exhales]
While we wait, I guess we could listen to another
song I help make.
♫I GO PEE PEE (YEAH) X4 ♫
♫MY NAME IS ONISION, WHEN I PEE I SPRAY SO STRONG♫
♫IT'S CLEAR AND CLEAN, I DRINK IT TOO♫
[shouts] THIS IS TAKING FOREVER!
Where is the goddamn muffler on this thing.
Where's the fucking muffler?!
Are you shitting me?
Yet, another thing that doesn't make sense in the world
Apparently if your car doesn't have fuel emissions,
You can't kill yourself with fuel emissions.
Nice job, Elon Musk.
How the hell else are your customers suppose to
kill themselves?
Think about that Tesla!
Stupid fucking safest car in the world piece of bitch.
Tesla! Take a hint, this is called an ignition switch,
You stick the key in, you turn it on,
And now I can die!
You see that?
That's death coming out!
Bye bye! Assholes.
Should've bought my fucking book!
